time phases because you see I have to consider four
years before the war and then I have to consider one
term and one summer after the war and
before the war
I had a physics instructor named Veazey.
I think it was D.D. Veazey. I'm not sure. That
probably influenced
me to continue and
work in the engineering field.
After
the war, I
guess Spencer J. Buchanan had more
effect on my schooling than anybody else.
He was in the Civil Engineering Department. I
guess he's a part-time instructor, if at all, now.
Buchanan, Burkhart & Associates has a
geotechnical engineering firm in downtown
Bryan. Mr.
Sandstett had a civil engineering department
before the war.
was quite influential. How did these men
influence you? By being willing and actually
giving more of their time than just what took place
between the bells. And showing a sincere effort in
your welfare, What's going on? How are you doing in
other studies? Things like that.
It's too easy to get into that. The bell starts, the
class starts, and when the bell rings, it's over,
and turn your papers in, and when you come back, all
the papers are spread across the desk, and find
your own paper, and that's your grade.
I guess it's back to
what I have always tried to teach to my
subordinates as well as to my two sons. Everybody
is a human being. They deserve to be treated like
one. And you can't treat everybody the same way.
Even if you're in a... college or university, I
don't care whether you've got 2,000 students or
32,000 students, the minute you start turning the
crank and trying to treat everybody the same way,
well, it's going to lose its personality, it's
going to lose its character, and these men are not
that
type. I had
a math instructor by the name of Halperin
that, of course, I'll never forget. But I don't
know that he was a great influence on my life. But he
was by the name of Halperin. You can figure
that he's probably German. But he was a calculus
instructor. He could start writing across the
board, and he could write till the end of the
period. And he seemed to have eyes in the back of his
head because we had these three benches. They had a
bench with three seats. Each bench had three arms
coming up. And he seemed to know every time I get my
feet up on the bench in front without ever turning
around, Mr. Johnson, take your feet down. I could
never find the mirror. I could never find a third
eye. I could never figure out where it was coming. I
remember one time after he told me twice, Mr.
Johnson, take your feet down. The third time he
turned around and he hit me right in the head with a
piece of chalk. But I could never figure out how he
knew that my feet were up there.
Did you think that A&M prepared you well to be an
engineer? Oh, yes. I think that back in that day
that was agricultural and engineering was
definitely the long arm of A&M.
Hopefully some of the other schools at A&M. I'm
talking about some of the other departments have
gotten stronger. But agriculture and
engineering were definitely the long arms. I
think since then there have been a number of other
colleges and universities come up and approach
them. I would never say that
it was on top unless maybe the petroleum school at
one time was and maybe it is now but i i don't just
because i finished there i don't say that it was the
number one engineering school in any particular
discipline of engineering but you thought felt
well prepared
Do you think that A&M changed your life? Do you
think that going there versus going to some other
school made a difference in your career? Oh, very
good. Very good. Would you explain? Well, I don't
think that
I would ever have
embarked on a military career by
going to someplace like where my other buddies
went, Rice or Sam Houston, either one.
Because rightfully or wrongfully, even though
One of them did come out as a colonel in the Marine
Corps.
I
believe that in the military that
the individual is an officer first, and then
whatever else he is, next. be it engineer, supply
man, or what, that if he's not the officer,
then
he's not going to attain that top level. I don't
care whether it's top staff or commander or the top
manager or what.
I guess the best way I can explain it is I've had too
many engineers come to me and say, hey,
I don't want to be a manager of engineers. I want to
be an engineer manager.
Okay. You don't want to be the top man.
Then you realize you're drawing a line for
yourself and you're not going to get above this
line. And it's probably Lieutenant Colonel.
You're never going to get above Lieutenant
Colonel.
And you'll be lucky if you get that high.
Well, I don't know. I just want to practice
engineering. I said, okay. If that's all you want
to do is just practice engineering.
And I'm not belittling you because I happen to be an
engineer myself and profess to be an engineer.
I've got a ticket hanging on the wall that says I am
one because I'm a professional engineer, a
registered engineer. But we can buy them for a dime
a dozen. We can't buy the manager of engineers
for down-to-date.
And I'm sure had I gone to Rice, I would have been a
hell of a lot smarter civil engineer. But I don't
think I would have been any better off in any way
than the manager. Some people say that, most or a
lot of people say that A&M is more than just an
institution of higher learning, that there's
something special, that it's sort of unique.
Would you agree with that? Well, I used the term a
while ago. It's a living laboratory that the other
places don't have. Because I'm sure, you know,
I've been to, well, let's take summer school. Even
summer school at A&M is a different life than core
life, and probably a different life than
long-term life during the regular school. And you
may or may not know those people who are living
right next door.
And that's too often the case at other schools in
the dormitories Classes are mixed, freshman,
sophomore, juniors. You don't know who they are
and what they are. You go your way and I go mine.
Like too many communities in other parts of the
world, other parts of the United States. What
about this idea of spirit?
Yeah, it's a hard thing to define.
It's there.
Sometimes I
get a feeling that we
attribute too much to it. We get emotionally
unstable.
some of the athletic contests where A&M has
absolutely no chance of winning and yet the spirit
will move a whole group of people and they'll feel
that they've been mistreated if they didn't end up
winning. They
lose all sense of objectivity, but a spirit taking
over, you know. That's where it works against you.
It can also work for you, but...
I'm of the school that believes in spirit and
tradition getting in there together, but
tradition is only... worthwhile so long as it
serves for the body that established it and
maintained it. When it starts going against it,
then that's the time to get rid of it. So do you think
there's a tradition of A&M or some of the spirit
that should be taught, drawn along?
Sometimes I look at some and think that we're...
I wonder what they're serving,
and yet I can rationalize with myself and say,
well,
you haven't been there so long. For example? Yeah,
the...
We'll have to find the word. The grooming, the
adding,
the things that the yell leaders go through to the
public, all that make them look absolutely
stupid.
to the way they walk, the way they carry their
shoulders, some of the movements. What in the hell
is wrong with those guys? And
yet I can't say that's wrong. And we did it 50 years
ago.
But what does it do? To me, I say now, what does it do?
Does it make a guy yell louder? Does it set him off
as, I am the leader, stay with me?
That's little. That's trite. Really what we're
searching to concentrate on is large things that
are that are hurting us. I don't know that there
are, but I hate people to be in, I'm not going to use
the word leadership, but yet the Yale leader is, by
the title, he's in a position of leadership. Yet
sometimes he looks absolutely asinine. He looks
stupid.
Let's start on your military career. Or is there
something else you want to say about A&M before we
move on to your military career when you were
commissioned in 1941? Well,
it's currently whether we take it in two sections.
Well, we can come back. I mean, if we say, yeah, my
military career was like my college career. It was
split. Yeah. Sure, we can come back. Were you happy
when you received your commission, or would you
have rather stayed at A&M and finished? No, I was
happy. You were ready to leave? Well, caught up
with the group, I was like everybody else. If the
group's going, I want to go. Even though you asked
for a deferment? Yeah, the college automatically
asked for a deferment for all of us. Oh, I see. You
did not personally. I wanted it. I didn't tell the
college, don't ask for it. Before we
get into the service,
are you a former student? How long have you been
there and how much do you know about life in the
Corps? Well, I know a lot because I've talked to a
lot of generals. Back when I was in school, the
Corps wasn't much larger than it is now, maybe
about twice the size. And daily, we'd have a cadet
officer of the day and a cadet officer of the guard.
And they were always under arms, under saber.
And during the spring,
each regiment would have its own ball on a Friday
night. the following night there would be a core
dance, which would be open to the entire school.
And as each regiment had its
festivities, it would have a parade on the drill
ground, just a regimental parade. And it was up to
the OD and the OG to be sure that The conduct was
maintained and the dress was maintained. People
just didn't come around the parade dressed like
everybody because it had an awful lot of visitors
at each regimental parade. And
the composite regiment was made up of the chem
warfare and the signal corps. And at the weekend
that they had their parade involved, I was
introduced to a young lady that you met at the door
down. And she was there as a date with someone else.
And then, of course, a member of the Combined
Regiment. He's Kim Walker, actually. And that
night, well, the OD and the OG, no matter what
regiment they belong to, they go and One of them is
always under saber and the other one could go out
and dance or socialize and then come back and
relieve the other one. But one of them was always
under saber. He was the cadet in charge at that
function. So I danced with her that night whenever
I could. And then the next day, the same people that
introduced me to her said, wouldn't you eat lunch
with her since her date is a table waiter? And I
said, yes, I'd enjoy it. Then I was off duty.
Somebody else was the OD and the OD. Well, I had such
an enjoyable time eating lunch with her that I came
right back to the battery, and I called all the
freshmen and the sophomore for the battery
together. And I said, who all is going to the dance
tonight? Dismissed. Dismissed. Who wants to go to
the dance tonight? And I picked one freshman and
one sophomore.
First, I said, who's got tucks? One, you, and you.
OK. So the game is late. The freshmen cannot cut in
on seniors. Sophomore can. Saturday night, she
danced with one freshman, one sophomore, and me,
and not with her own team. Well, it didn't take but
about three months, and then we went through the
ring, and we were engaged by the time when the
commission came along, and married very shortly
thereafter. So that was 1941, then? Yep, that's
1941. And where's your wife from? Is she from
Bryan, then? She's from Missouri City, Texas,
which is a little town. By Houston. Yep, just west
of Houston. Now, it wasn't as large as it is now.
They measured populations like 36, 37. And she
came up to A&M for the dance? For the regimental
ball. So then you got married and went? October.
October of 41. Went on active duty in July and
married in October. OK, let's start talking about
your active duty. You send me just one sheet here on
your military career. OK, my senior year. The Army
Air Corps came into all the engineering schools
enticing engineering students to put in transfer
to the Army Air Corps. They could see a buildup and
they could see a need of engineers. And I put in for a
transfer to the Army Air Corps. But when
commissioning came along, those things had not
come through, so I was commissioned in the field
artillery. I had orders to go to
Fort Bliss and then go to Fort Sill to go to the
artillery school. That's where all the others
went, like Becker and all that stuff. Okay, but I
was still wondering about this other piece of
paper. So I came over here to Fort Sam, started
running it down, and they said, well, it's still
pending, and as far as we know, you're still going
to go to Bliss, and then you'll go on up to Sill. And
we're going to issue you a set of orders. So they
did. And I got my foot marker back and everything,
and I was getting ready to head out to El Paso,
living in Houston at that time. all of a sudden the
wire came in and transferred to the air corps
reserve non-rated and headed to brookly field
mobile alabama so they're just the same number of
miles but in the opposite direction so i got over
there and i was about the 16th officer to report to
this brand new base and it was still being
constructed i mean we were in mud up to here and
really yeah and uh As often as I have found the
ingenuities of the service, they didn't need
engineers over there at that time. But they needed
administrative officers. So they sent me off to
the Adjutant General School up in Washington, DC.
As soon as you got there? Well, very shortly. I was
up there at the time. No, December 41. Yeah,
December 41. I was in Washington on 7 December.
Tell me about that. We had gotten married. And
do you, by chance, know a man around College
Station, Lucian Morgan? OK. He's in the insurance
business. And he lived out south side of College
Station. But he was one of the students. He was the
first lieutenant at the school. And I was the
second lieutenant.
My wife had come up. Lucian and another lieutenant
named Johnson and myself were up actually
visiting the Gettysburg battlefield on that
Sunday. We stopped at a little cafe to get
something to eat. We walked in and there wasn't
anyone in the cafe. Nobody behind a counter,
nobody behind a cash register, nobody sitting at
the table. We sat down and then all of a sudden we
heard coming from the kitchen this radio
broadcast. Well, the three of the men, we cleared
the counter and went into the kitchen, and that's
where we heard of the bombing. On the way back...
What were your thoughts? Oh, what does someone
think? I don't know what our thoughts really were.
We knew it was coming sooner or later, but had no
idea it was coming on that side. Everybody was
looking toward Europe. You thought the Germans
would attack before the Japanese? Yeah, sure. So
on the way back from Gettysburg to the cantonment
where the school is, we had to come right by the
Japanese embassy. And as we came by, you could see
the flames on the inner court burning up over the
top of the building. They were just burning
everything they could get their hands on that
night. All their documents? Yeah, all their
stuff. Were there any Americans outside
protesting? No, the police had things pretty well
under control, keeping people away. Was
Washington congested, or was there a lot of
people, or was it confusion? Yeah, a little
confusion, and of course, the military
department still worked in uniforms. It was one of
these one-day-a-week deal of wearing uniforms.
To see some of the Navy boys turn out in December in
whites looked pretty cold. Yeah. That's all they
had was white. They managed to get by for years
without having a wardrobe uniform. So they were
civilian clothes. Well, our school was cut short
by a couple of weeks. All of us that had leave, the
leaves were canceled. And we all had to go right
back to duty stations instead of go home for
Christmas and so on. And that was probably the
greatest hardship. By the time we got back to
Mobile, There were enough people that had come in
in the six weeks and had filled up all of the
apartments in town. And it pushed us out to an area
called Hollinger Island, south of Mobile. And all
that was out there were summer cottages, single
frame, single floor. No sheetrock walls, no walls
at all, except just the outside wall. It was pretty
cool. But we managed to make it. We made some
friendships there. And what did the Air Force have
you do? What was your duty there? When I reported
in, I became the assistant base adjutant.
Because, again, they didn't need engineers. And
then they sent me off to the Adjutant General
School, which even strengthened that you're
going to be an administrative officer. So
when I came back, I went back to the job. as
assistant base adjutant for just a couple of weeks
because then we started activating what was known
as air depot groups. Air depot group is an
organization that does second and third echelon
supply and maintenance in the Air Corps. It goes
and sets up and operates as a depot just as, you
might say, like Kelly does here or like Tinker does
up in Oklahoma. Aircraft are brought into it for
modifications and repair and so on. It can't be
done down at the unit level.
There were already some in existence in Georgia.
So a team of us went over and spent some time with
them to see how they operated and how they were
farmed and so on. Then came back to Mobile, uh,
Brooklyn and started farming these air depot
groups. And the first one that was farmed was the
seventh air depot group. And, uh, I became the
commanding officer of the headquarters squadron
and, uh, we had supply squadron and repair
squadron and we had quartermaster truck company
and a chemical warfare platoon and a bunch of
attached units. We were fortunate because being
the first one formed, because as these people came
in from the different training schools and came in
and went into the personnel pool, we had first grab
at them. and actually took the best qualified that
we could to our own outfit, and then the 24th and the
25th was farm and so on, and so we had what we thought
was a pretty good outfit. About how many men?
A group had right at 1,200 men. I had about 160 men in
the headquarters squadron, and plus the...
quartermaster and the Kim Warfares were attached
to me. I had three at that time. I was first and I had
three second lieutenant subordinate. All three
of them were ROTC graduate. One of them was a pilot
and his job when we set up he would be the base
operations officer. He would control the flight
line. And within our squadron were the people that
worked for him. And the headquarters commander
was also the director of personnel for the entire
group. So I knew the personnel man. We had some cute
things happen. We had probably the best engineer
officer that ever walked in the Air Corps and the
Air Force named Kroeber. And he was the commanding
officer of the repair squadron. He was a captain
when we got ready to leave and they came down and
just picked him out because he was German born,
German trained, military, everything. And he was
a classmate of some of the higher people in
Germany. No way. You're not going to Europe. You
may go to the Pacific, but you're not going to
Europe. Or leave him in command and put somebody
else in there. What did you think about that? Well,
we all hated to see it because by then we had
established a pretty good outfit.
He was a captain, Captain Honeycutt, commander of
the supply squadron. They go by Huntsville now.
All three of us had what we thought were
crackerjack squadrons, and we had a good outfit.
Anything that happened to it, well, you know, I
just
don't really know what to think about. But then the
longer you were away from it and you could see it,
then you realized it was probably the best
for security, and even though the guy I knew him
later in life as a full colonel, and he was clear of
everything. It was just one of those things. A very
interesting thing happened that
later came back to, I'm sure, assist. I had a pay
officer by the name of Loren Durkee. He was one of my
second lieutenants. At that time,
enlisted personnel were paid in cash at the pay
table. Come up, salute the pay officer, and the
sergeant would sit there and read off how much he
got, and the pay officer would hand him so much
money, and the guy would sign on the line and turn
around and walk off.
We got through paying the squadron, and we had $94
left on the table.
He came to me and said, what do we do? And I said,
First Sergeant, I said, Sergeant Hartman, call
the squadron back in. So we hadn't given anybody
permission to leave the post. I said, call the
squadron back in. And went down the amount that
everybody was to be paid, had everybody checked to
be sure that they'd gotten that much money. Went
back over to the finance officer where we'd drawn
the money. You're clear. You're all right. So they
said, what are we going to do with it? I said, okay,
you're sitting on an order to turn in all of our
athletic equipment tomorrow back to the base. We
can't take it with us. We already knew we were
leaving. We can't take it with us. You and Sergeant
Hartman go downtown to Mobile tomorrow and buy $94
worth of athletic equipment. List it. Spread it in
the squadron so we know where it is. And when we got
to England, we were the only outfit that had any
athletic equipment. We had $94 worth of athletic
equipment. Paid off before we ever got there. The
third day out, we had a boat drill out in the
Atlantic. And I'd been down visiting my troops. We
were in little cabins, but they were down below.
While I was down there, they rang the siren before
we hit our side spot on the deck. And I had no sooner
got on the deck than somebody yelled, Lieutenant
Johnson doesn't have a life preserver. In 15
seconds, one hit me right behind the head.
I don't have any idea where it came from, but it came
from somewhere in that squadron. Huh? No, it was a
life preserver. But boy, had I been caught on that
deck without that life
preserver, they would have ripped me from one end
to the other. But somebody in that squadron took
care of it. That's right. Before we ever left
Mobile. When did you leave? How long were you
there? We left in... July of 42. So I got back from
the Adjutant General School in December just
before Christmas. In seven months we had formed
the outfit and had gone up to Dick's and we pulled
out in July.
While we were there, for instance, this is back to
the old Harvey way of doing things,
Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't. I
very casually, at a standby inspection, one day
said to one of the enlisted men, I said, I believe
you've got your socks and your handkerchiefs
crossed that belong in the opposite corner. I got
to the door while I hear this, and I said, son of a
bitch, who the hell is making this? Well, the next
day, the boy was pretty well beat up, apparently.
And I asked the first sergeant, I said, do you have
any idea what happened to this man? He said, no, but
the duty corporal and he were down on the beach last
night. And this was, we were still close enough to
regular Army troops that that was still prevalent
in, well, I had a, first sergeant that went off to
officer's training school. And I called the next
sergeant up and said, okay, Sergeant Prattman,
you've inherited this first sergeant's job. And
he says, Lieutenant, says, not me. He says, this
thing is going to be a civilian man's army, and it's
rapidly becoming one. You don't want another one
of us to be your first sergeant. He was a career
officer? Huh? Was he a civilian or a career
officer? No, he was a career non-commissioned
officer. Right, okay. That's right. He said, you
don't want me. He said, if you can find me one more
strike somewhere, I'd appreciate it. He said, but
the man you want to be first sergeant of this
squadron is Sergeant Hartman. Hartman... had
been a selectee, he had come in the draft route. So
we gave them each one more strike, and then later on
gave Ortman one more strike. And when we sailed,
Ortman was the first sergeant. Fought like a
selectee, worked like a guy that had been drafted.
Perfect set
up. Some of these old boys were sharp. Some of them
knew that. Things were changing fast enough that
they'd be completely out of place. Because, man,
that old system, it could get rough.
Mobile was an interesting place. It later became
one of the largest depots and kept turning these,
air depot groups out.
Unfortunately, when we got to England,
I keep saying all of our efforts were wasted
because
we got there mighty, mighty early and they didn't
yet need air depot groups, but later As I got in
other jobs, I realized that you can't move all the
checkers at one time. You've got to keep putting
them in there, you know, and sooner or later you've
got everything you need. But we could have gone
over a year or 18 months later and still been there
on time. So what did you do when you arrived in July
of 1942? In August, yeah. In August, whereabouts,
where were you stationed? That's interesting. We
debarked. at Swansea, Wales. And Swansea is a
tidal port. You come in with the tide. And if you're
little, you stay afloat. And if you're big, you sit
on the bottom and wait till the tide comes in to take
you back out. Well, we got in just in time. And we sat
on the bottom and then leaned over against the
dock. And so there the ship was leaning against the
dock. Everybody got on the trains. And they went
all over the United Kingdom. Well, our
destination was Warrington. Warrington sits
between Liverpool and Manchester. So it's in that
part of the country. And the night that we got to
Warrington, we weren't quite yet where we were
supposed to be. Jerry made one of his last big raids
just starting at Manchester and just dropping all
the way to Liverpool. So that was a big industrial
area. Not precision bombing, just hat-hazard
bombing. Well, the train stopped. I turned to
Sergeant Hartman and I said, Sergeant, get these
men off this train. And he and the other sergeant, I
bet they cleared that train in about 30 seconds.
They went out the windows, they went out the doors,
they went between cars, they went out the top
ventilators. They got off that train every way
imaginable. We didn't lose a single guy. Was the
train hit? Yeah. But that was our baptism. Well, we
got to a place called Burtonwood, and we sat there,
and we sat there, and we used our $94 worth of sport
equipment. Really wasn't anything to do for about
a month, I guess. And then they started tapping the
entire group to... manned different outfits all
over the United Kingdom. Before it was over with,
the 7th Air Department had practically lost its
identity of personnel. It hadn't lost its name. I
went from there up to Prestwick, Scotland, and
became the Air Corps base adjutant up there
sitting on an RAF base. It's both a municipal field
and an RAF base. Had some pretty interesting
incidents.
We had, well, this pilot was subordinate to me,
went up also with me, and his name was Jarvis. He's a
Mormon from Salt Lake.
And we had to put a detachment way up in the Herbides
that went up. Air Corps was flying across the North
Atlantic. If they couldn't make it all the way down
into Scotland, they'd make an emergency landing
in the Hermitage. So we put one officer and six
enlisted men up there that could work on the
aircraft and hopefully get it flying so the guy
could continue on into Prestwick if they made the
emergency landing. And he'd fly me up there and pay
the troops, and we'd take care of it. We were
about
two miles from Johnny Walker's plant at
Kilmarnock and since the RAF had an arrangement
with the plant they included us and so they gave us
at the plant to defend if Jerry were to make a
parachute landing on the plant. Oh, yeah. Well, it
was a lot of fun and socializing, too, because we'd
go over and make dry runs, you know, which would end
up being very wet runs. But everybody would go into
position and make out like Jerry was coming over,
and then they'd close down the station and then
pull out the scotch bags, and everybody started
drinking scotch. But it was interesting.
How did you get along with the British and the RAF?
Well,
pretty good, especially the Scots people up there
were fine people. We hadn't flooded the island to
the extent that we were in their heritage. This was
still, this was 42. So it was great. They're happy
to see you. Yeah. At least somebody's going to be in
this thing with us, you know. Whether they go down
with us or not, we don't know. But, you know, a good
feeling. That was back in the day when the northern
bomb site was quite a secret thing. I mean, boy,
they controlled it, you know, under guard all the
time. That was the biggest thing that we had for the
bombers. Well, Prestwick was the northern port
that the aircraft would enter coming into the
United Kingdom. And after making a run across the
North Atlantic, which might take a guy two or three
days, you know, stopping here and there and so on,
they'd park out there on this great big old grass
ramp and open the door and then just start throwing
out the tomato cans and the trash. And then some of
our crews would have to go out and clean up the ramp
as they moved on down into the kingdom. And sure
enough, somebody found a Norton bomb site. They
found it on Sunday, the one day that my office
wasn't open. He brought it over to the passenger
traffic terminal and says, turn this in to
Lieutenant Johnson tomorrow. Norton bomb site.
Just put Lieutenant Johnson's name on it and stick
it down under the counter. Believe it or not, three
weeks later, intelligence came up from London.